---
title: The Power of Saying No (To Sugar)
layout: post
tags: justsayno
---
Over the last couple of weeks, I've been avoiding sugar. Not just avoiding
eating spoon-fulls of crystal sugar, but avoiding food and drink that contains
sugar.

I've thinking about reducing my sugar intake for a while now. There's [been
enough change in how science sees the sources of weight
gain](http://mobile.nytimes.com/2014/06/11/opinion/what-causes-weight-gain.html)
to be convincing.

But regardless, I found myself eating pie on the weekend, grab a sweet snack
regularly (the perils of working from home) or regularly get a cookie or cheese
cake at the coffee shop. It just seems like the right thing to do.

Of course there'd always be the convincing argument to myself that I could stop
anytime I want, the classic trap of letting your irrational self get in the way
of rational decisions. Just ask any smoker.

But then I came across [an article that pointed to actively saying no being a
possible
answer](https://medium.com/@cammipham/7-things-you-need-to-stop-doing-to-be-more-productive-backed-by-science-a988c17383a6).
[Studies
showed](http://www.jstor.org/discover/10.1086/663212?uid=2&uid=4&sid=21103851959041)
that people who said "I don't" were much more likely to resist something than
people who said "I can't."

Pretty remarkable, and I wanted to turn that into an experiment with myself.

It made me think of the day when I stopped smoking, on March 30, 1999.

All I said to myself was "I'm not smoking anymore."

I chucked my remaining cigarettes without much further thought, and that was the
end of it.

The hardest part of breaking out of a habit is finding a replacement. Rather
than resort to a cigarette after lunch or other meals, I went for a coffee
instead.

Yes, this is how my coffee affinity started.

There's something powerful in consciously saying no. One day, I decided to just
say no to sugar.

That meant cutting out delicious things like cookies, cake, pie and everything
else that contains processed sugar, but it's for the good of the bigger picture.
Most of these are non-essential foods.

There's no rational downside to saying no to sugar.

But the real power is in consciously saying no to something. Whether it's a
habit you want to get rid of, or whether it's a feature you want to add to
your product or simple deciding on what you want to do with your day, your
month, your life.

Saying no to something can have an incredible effect on your conscious to
actually go through with it.

**Knowing what not to do can be quite liberating for your mind too. It leaves
room for other, more important things to do.**
