---
title: Start by Building and Selling Small Products 
tags: smallbiz
layout: post
---
We love grand ideas. As engineers in particular, we like the idea of building
something big that solves an idea we've had. We love sweating the details, we
love refining architecture, we love building the right tools for the job.

When you start a business, this approach can foil your grand idea before you
even hit a market. This ignores that ideas alone are worth nothing without a
market for them.

What if, instead of working on your grand idea right away, you start working on
something small?

When you've found a market you don't instantly need to build a big product to
serve it, you can start much smaller than that. Starting small has the benefit
that you can gauge out the market and its interests and that you keep risk lower
than with building something big right away. Products are shrouded in
uncertainty, keeping the risk low means keeping your losses low, which is rather
beneficial when you're bootstrapping.

Building something small initially and slowly increasing the scope of what you
build has another benefit. Your initial products start feeding into the work for
the subsequent products. The money made from your first products helps you to
build more products.

Smaller Products can beget more, slightly bigger products. I love this idea,
also called ["stacking bricks."](http://unicornfree.com/stacking-the-bricks)

The [Riak Handbook](http://riakhandbook.com) turned out to be such a product for
me. Working on it took the better of three months, a big part of that spent full
time on writing, editing, creating the publishing workflow (I wouldn't recommend
building the publishing chain yourself), and the marketing site.

While the book's most sales happened in the first days of going public, it
continued to sell for now more than two years, both on the site and on the
Kindle store.

It helped a lot in getting [Travis CI](https://travis-ci.com) off the ground as
a product. It wasn't a lot of money that came in, but for the following twelve
months after publishing the book, it brough in up to $1000 per month extra.
Quite handy as passive income when you're working on bootstrapping another
product.

How can you build something small before building something bigger? Here are a
few ideas.

**Build an audience with writing**

The Riak Handbook started out by way of this very site, if you will. Early on in
the craze of NoSQL databases, I started writing about the fun and silliness I
had playing with some of them.
  
That in turn led to the idea of the NoSQL Handbook, which, after more thought,
distilled into the Riak Handbook.
  
I unknowingly built up interest for the technology, just by sharing what I
discovered playing with them. [The joys of new
technologies.](http://www.paperplanes.de/2014/4/1/the-joy-of-new-technology.html)
  
**Sell what you learn (and what you know)**

A book or even a series of screencasts is a great means to start stacking the
bricks. It's a nice next step from building up an audience, and it doesn't even
require you to be an expert at something right away.
  
Rather than dump your entire knowledge into a book, write about what you learn,
or learn as you write.
  
Here's a little secret: the Riak Handbook was my personal Riak learning
experience.
  
Sure, I've had exposure with it before, working for Basho and with their
customers, but my deepest exposure with all facets of Riak was writing the book.
  
It turned out to be a great learning experience for distributed systems and for
Riak itself, even picked up some Erlang along the way.
  
**Sell something that doesn't yet exist**

Here's a crazy idea, before you actually build something, sell it. Put up a
landing page for your product, start marketing it, see if someone bites.
  
If they do, you have all the more incentive to actually build it.

I'm a big fan of grand ideas myself. But the Riak Handbook, as small as it is,
was a convincing exercise that it pays to start small. It pays off slowly, and
revenue will start trickling in, but as you add more products, you add more
revenue.

Heck, if you enjoy writing and selling books, keep doing it. Build more, sell
more of them.

For some more inspiration on starting small and building your way up, I'd highly
recommend these books:

* [The $100 Startup](http://amzn.to/1hkUWv5)
* [Start Small, Stay Small](http://amzn.to/1mEJj7r)
* [Side Projects](http://www.sideprojectbook.com)
