---
title: Why Hiring for "Culture Fit" Hurts Your Culture
layout: post
tags: culture
---
There's a term which in the sense of hiring (and firing), is more loaded than
anything else. I'm talking about the **culture fit**.

A recent [post on the Lighthouse
blog](https://getlighthouse.com/blog/interview-mistakes/) (a product I'm
actively using and that I'm a big fan of, by the way!) states that not checking
for culture fit is one of the eight interview mistakes that cost you great
  candidates.

The post brings up the most peculiar example in this regard, a company culture
of drinking (disclaimer: I've been a non-drinker for more than 16 years now).
If your company has a culture of heavy drinking, then you can be sure as hell
that someone like me will neither fit nor want to fit into that culture.

Startup culture in particular is known for their silent rituals and expectations
on new hires. If a mum or dad can't go out to a bar at night, that's a
thumbs-down, right? After all, they're not willing to socialize, and your
company is like a family. A family that drinks together to create and maintain
bonds.

The word culture fit continues to be thrown around both as reasons not to hire
someone and to fire someone. It's a simple explanation, and it should be clear
to anyone on the team (and the person affected) why they're not a culture fit,
right?

There's one fundamental mistake in both using and looking for culture fit as a
means for hiring: **You're assuming that your current culture is healthy and
doesn't need to be changed.**

Using culture fit as a reason to fire or not to hire says more about you than it
says about them. It says that you're not willing to dig deep and figure out what
exactly you think doesn't match in your expectation and a candidates
personality. It shows that your culture is a fixed property of your company and
team, one that can't be changed, one that is exactly where you want it to be.

Culture fit is a reason to continue maintaining the status quo.

But let's take it one step at a time.

**What is culture?**

Culture fit is a loaded word, because the word culture has so many possible
definitions. There are a lot of layers in your company.

It's safe to assume that culture is represented by your company's and team's
values. If you've poured lots of work into those, then you have a good
definition of your team's expected behaviour.

But culture goes beyond that. Culture is what happens at your company every day.
Culture includes founders buying themselves [expensive
cars](http://www.nytimes.com/2015/04/30/technology/a-founder-of-secret-the-anonymous-social-app-shuts-it-down-as-use-declines.html?_r=0)
from a secondary investment.

Culture includes silent expectations like going to socialization events in
evenings, like drinking at bars, dinners and other company events. No one wants
to put those on job ads, right?

Culture is how you write and phrase your job ads. Culture is whether you're
looking for rock stars or want to build a great team and help people grow.
Culture is how you pay your people. Culture is how a CEO behaves towards their
team and in public. Culture is how leadership fosters and drives change. Culture
is how you treat your customers. Culture is how you treat your team. Culture is how
open you are to changing the status quo. Culture is a team that only consists of
white dudes in their late twenties.

Culture is that ping pong table in your office. Culture are all those free and
unhealthy soft drinks that your company keeps in the fridge. Culture is serving
your team breakfast or lunch (or both?) every day to make sure they're in the
office for as long as possible. Culture is talking about commitment issues when
someone on your team needs to leave early because they have children to take
care of.

Everything you do every day, in your company and team, is part of your culture.

If your assumption is that no one should be able to be a part of that and that
it's written in stone and cannot be changes, then by all means, hire or fire
based on culture fit.

Culture fit is a means to keep people out of a protected and privileged circle,
rather than to protect that circle's values, which is probably what you think it
is..

Culture fit is a means to avoid talking about whether your culture is healthy
and whether it needs to be improved, and most importantly, to avoid actively
changing and improving it.

**Stop using "culture fit"**

If culture fit isn't a reason for not hiring someone or firing someone, then
what is?

Culture fit is a loaded word because it can have so many meanings, it can apply
on so many layers of your company. Using it means you want to spend little time
on figuring out where exactly someone isn't a good match for your own
expectations and why those expectations exist.

The best way to avoid falling into the culture fit trap is to have an honest
look at why someone doesn't match your expectations. Did they not match implicit
or explicit expectations? If they're implicit, are they really a part of your
company culture? If they are, why are they not explicit?

If socializing over drinks is an expectation you have, then you should be honest
enough to make it an explicit expectation. Or, if you want my advice, you should
revisit why and whether it's such an important part of your culture.

Because I can tell you right here, making it explicit will help keep even more
people out of your precious circle. Parents, people of religion who don't drink,
non-drinkers. You can be sure that those people will never be part of your
team, and that your team will continue to attract the same kind of people that
are already a part of it.

"Culture fit" hampers the biggest benefit of any great team: diversity. Stop
using it and start looking at the real reasons why you don't want to hire
someone. They might not be their flaws but yours.
