---
title: An Alternate Reality for Startups
layout: post
tags: startups
---
A reality where success isn't measured in the amount of funding rounds or size
of acquisitions but in terms of [monthly revenue and positive cash
flow](https://www.groovehq.com/blog/100k).

A reality where a startup's impact isn't measured with a hockey stick, but based
on [the impact it has on its community, its people and its
customers](http://www.paperplanes.de/2014/3/27/building-an-ethical-business.html).

A reality where startups acknowledge their own survivor bias and realize that
not everything they've done has lead them to where they are now, but that
they're here in spite of what they did.

A reality where [failure is neither celebrated nor
punished](http://www.paperplanes.de/2013/6/17/a-short-story-on-human-error.html),
but always used as an [opportunity to learn and
improve](https://codeascraft.com/2012/05/22/blameless-postmortems/).

A reality where [diversity is a requirement to build a great
company](http://www.fastcompany.com/3045471/most-creative-people/rent-the-runways-formula-for-finding-and-fostering-women-leaders)
rather than an afterthought.

A reality where co-founder isn't a badge of honor, but where [everyone in the
company focuses on what they do now and in the
future](https://keen.io//blog/117530017991/ask-why-a-lot-when-you-organize-your-startup),
regardless of their past achievements.

A reality where humility rather than a [big
ego](http://www.businessinsider.com/rap-genius-co-founder-blasts-his-former-partners-2015-1)
is a fundamental attribute of founders and teams.

A reality where startups [focus on the good they can
do](https://unicornfree.com/2014/the-responsibility-to-give-back-our-charitable-giving-in-2014)
  rather than how fast they can grow.

A reality where startups are celebrated for how little money they needed to get
to where they are rather than how much money was invested in them.

A reality where startups focus on work-life balance rather than try to keep
their people in the office and focused on work for as long as possible.

A reality where startups focus on a [great work environment and supporting a
remote
culture](https://hbr.org/2014/01/to-raise-productivity-let-more-employees-work-from-home)
rather retaining their people by providing [snacks, soft drinks, and other kinds
of perks](https://modelviewculture.com/pieces/how-perks-can-divide-us).

A reality where [openness and transparency](https://open.bufferapp.com) are the
default modus operandi.

A reality where startups don't hire ninjas or rockstars or "the best," but on
hiring great people and helping them grow.

A reality where talking about money, cash flow,
[revenue](https://baremetrics.com/open), profits, and [costs of running a
startup](http://inside.idonethis.com/startup-expenses/) is a source of
inspiration rather than seen as losing a competitive advantage.

A reality where startups acknowledge that there is no perfect reality, only
experimentation and continuous improvement.

None of these realities exist in isolation, and none of them necessarily needs
the other to co-exist. But imagine a world where a majority of them coincide.

Is any of these realities better? That's up to you to decide.

All of these realities exist today, in one way or the other. They're alternate
realities, they're not dreams.
